Fie, fie on all tiredjades, on all mad masters,
and all foul ways.
Was ever a man so beaten?
Was ever man so rayed?
Was ever man so weary?
I am sent before to make afire,
and they are coming afterto warm them,
but I, with blowing thefire, shall warm myself,
for considering theweather,
a taller man than I willtake cold.
Holla.
Ho.
Curtis!
Who is that calls socoldly?
A piece of ice.
A fire, good Curtis.
Is my master and his wifecoming, Grumio?
Ay, Curtis, ay, andtherefore fire, fire.
Cast on no water.
Is she so hot a shrew asshe's reported?
She was, good Curtis,before this frost,
but wilt thou make a fire,
or shall I complain onthee to our mistress
for being slow in thy hotoffice?
I prithee, good Grumio, tellme, how goes the world?
A cold world, Curtis, inevery office but thine,
and therefore, fire.
Do thy duty, and have thyduty,
for my master and mistressare almost frozen to death.
There's fire ready.
Therefore, good Grumio,the news.
Why, "Jack, boy; ho, boy,"and as much news as I wilt.
Come, you are so full ofcony-catching.
And therefore fire, for Ihave caught extreme cold.
Where's the cook?
Is supper ready, the housetrimmed,
rushes strewed, cobwebsswept?
Carpets laid, andeverything in order?
All ready.
Therefore, good Grumio, Ipray thee, the news.
First, know my horse istired,
my master and mistressfallen out.
How?
Out of their saddles intothe dirt.
Thereby hangs a tale.
Let's hear it, goodGrumio.
Lend thine ear.
Here.
There.
This is to feel a tale,not to hear a tale.
And therefore 'tis calleda sensible tale,
and this cuff was but toknock at your ear
and beseech it listening.
Now I begin.
Imprimis, we came down afoul hill,
my master riding behind mymistress--
Both of one horse?
What's that to thee?
Why, a horse.
Tell thou the tale, buthadst thou not crossed me,
thou shouldst have heardhow her horse fell,
and she under her horse.
Thou shouldst have heardin how miry a place,
how she was bemoiled,
how he left her with thehorse upon her,
how he beat me because herhorse stumbled,
how she waded through thedirt to pluck him off me,
how he swore, how she prayedthat never prayed before,
how I cried, how thehorses ran away,
how her bridle was burst,
how I lost my crupper withmany things of worthy memory
which now shall die inoblivion
and thou returnunexperienced to the grave.
By this reckoning, he ismore shrew than she.
Ay, and that thou and theproudest of you all
shall find when he comeshome,
but what talk I of this?
Call forth Nathaniel,Joseph, Nicholas, Philip,
Walter, Sugarsop, and therest.
Are they ready?
They are.
Call them forth.
Do you hear, ho?
You must meet my master tocountenance my mistress.
She has a face of her own.
Who knows not that?
Thou, it seems, that calls forcompany to countenance her.
I call them forth tocredit her.
She comes to borrownothing of them.
Welcome home, Grumio.
How now, Grumio.
What, Grumio.
How now, old lad?
Welcome, you--how now, you--what, you--fellow, you--
and thus much forgreeting.
Now, my spruce companions,
is all ready and allthings neat?
All things is ready.
How near is our master?
E'en at hand, andtherefore be not--
cock's passion, silence!
I hear my master.
What, no man at door tohold my stirrup nor totake my horse?
- Where is Nathaniel? -Here, sir.
- Gregory? - Here, sir.
- Philip? - Here, sir.
Here, sir; here, sir;here, sir; here, sir!
You logger-headed andunpolish'd grooms.
What, no attendance?
No regard?
No duty?
Where is the foolish knaveI sent before?
Here, sir, as foolish as Iwas before.
You peasant swain, youwhoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet mein the park
and bring along theserascal knaves with thee?
Nathaniel's coat, sir, wasnot fully made.
Gabriel's pumps were allunpink'd i' the heel,
and there was no link tocolour Peter's hat,
and Walter's dagger wasnot come from sheathing.
There was none fine butAdam, Ralph, and Gregory.
The rest were ragged, old, andbeggarly, yet as they are,
here are they come to meetyou, sir!
Shh!
Go, rascals, go, and fetchmy supper in.
Where is the life thatlate I led--
Where are those--
Sit down, Kate, andwelcome.
Food!
Food, food, food!
Why, when, I say?
Er-bock, bock, bock, bock.
Er-bock, bock, bock.
Bock, bock, bock.
Nay, good sweet Kate, bemerry.
Off with my boots, yourogues!
You villains, when?
It was the friar of ordersgray,
an he forth walked on hisway.
Ouch, you rogue,
you pluck my foot awry.
Take that, and mend theplucking off the other.
Be merry, Kate.
Some water, here; what,ho.
Where's my spanielTroilus?
Sirrah, get you hence,
and bid my cousinFerdinand come hither--
one, Kate, that you mustkiss and be acquainted with.
Where are my slippers?
Shall I have some water?
Ugh.
Come, Kate, and wash andwelcome heart--oh!
Whoreson villain!
Will you let it fall?
Patience, I pray you.
'Twas a fault unwilling.
A whoreson beetle-headed,flap-ear'd knave.
Come, Kate, sit down.
I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks,sweet Kate?
Or else shall I?
What's this?
Mutton?
Ay.
Who brought it?
I.
'Tis burnt--
Ah, ah!
And so is all the meat.
What dogs are these?
Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains,bring it from the dresser,
and serve it thus to methat love it not?
Theretake it to you,trenchers, cups, and all...
you heedless joltheads andunmanner'd slaves.
Do you grumble?
I'll be with you straight.
I pray you, husband, benot so disquiet.
The meat was well if youwere so contented.
I tell thee, Kate, 'twasburnt!
Ah, ha, hoo, hoo!
Shh!
And dried away, and I expresslyam forbid to touch it,
for it engenders choler,planteth anger,
and better 'twere thatboth of us did fast--
since, of ourselves,ourselves are choleric--
than feed it with suchover-roasted flesh.
Uck.
Be patient.
Tomorrow 't shall bemended,
and for this night, we'llfast for company.
Yeeearghhh!
Come, I will bring thee tothy bridal chamber.
Didst ever see the like?
He kills her in her ownhumor.
Where is he?
In her chamber, making asermon of continency to her
and rails and swears andrates that she, poor soul,
knows not which way tostand, to look, to speak,
and sits as one new-risenfrom a dream.
Away, away, for he iscoming hither.
Thus have I politiclybegun my reign...
and 'tis my hope to endsuccessfully.
My falcon now is sharp andpassing empty...
until she stoop, she mustnot be full-gorged,
for then she never looksupon her lure.
Another way I have to manmy haggard,
to make her come and knowher keeper's call--
that is, to watch her aswe watch these kites
that bate and beat andwill not be obedient.
She eat no meat today nornone shall eat.
Last night, she slept notnor tonight she shall not.
As with the meat,
some undeserved fault I'll findabout the making of the bed,
and here I'll fling thepillow, there the bolster,
this way the coverlet,another way the sheets.
Ay, and amid this hurly, Iintend that all is done
in reverend care of her,
and in conclusion, sheshall watch all night,
and if she chance to nod,I'll rail and brawl
and with the clamor keepher still awake.
This is a way to kill awife with kindness,
and thus, I'll curb hermad and headstrong humor.
He that knows better howto tame a shrew,
now let him speak.
'Tis charity to show.
Is't possible, friendLicio, that Mistress Bianca
doth fancy any other butLucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bearsme fair in hand.
Sir, to satisfy you inwhat I said,
stand by and mark themanner of his teaching.
Now, mistress, profit youin what you read?
What, sir, read you?
First resolve me that.
I read that I profess, theArt to Love.
And may you prove, sir,master of your art.
While you, sweet dear,prove mistress of my heart.
Quick proceeders, marry.
Now, tell me, I pray,
you that durst swear atyour mistress Bianca
loved none in the world sowell as Lucentio.
Despiteful love,unconstant womankind.
I tell thee, Licio, thisis wonderful.
Mistake no more.
I am not Licio nor amusician as I seem to be
but one that scorn to livein this disguise
for such a one as leaves agentleman
and makes a god of such acullion.
Know, sir, that I amcall'd Hortensio.
Signior Hortensio, I haveoften heard
of your entire affectionto Bianca,
and since mine eyes arewitness of her lightness,
I will with you if you beso contented
forswear Bianca and herlove forever.
O, see how they kiss andcourt.
Signior Lucentio, here ismy hand,
and here I firmly vow
never to woo her no morebut do forswear her
as one unworthy all theformer favors
that I have fondlyflatter'd her withal.
And here I take theunfeigned oath
never to marry with herthough she would entreat.
Fie on her.
O, see how beastly shedoth court him.
O, would all the world buthe had quite forsworn.
For me, that I may surelykeep my vow,
I will be married to awealthy widow
ere three days pass thathath as long loved me
as I have loved this prouddisdainful haggard.
And so farewell, SigniorLucentio.
Kindness in women, nottheir beauteous looks,
shall win my love,
and so I take my leave inresolution as I swore before.
Resolution-- resolution--
Mistress Bianca, bless youwith such grace
as 'longeth to a lover'sblessed case.
Nay, I have ta'en younapping, gentle love,
and have forsworn you withHortensio.
Tranio, you jest.
What, have you bothforsworn me?
Mistress, we have.
Then we are rid of Licio.
I' faith, he'll have alusty widow now
that shall be wooed andwedded in a day.
God give him joy.
Ay, and he'll tame her.
He says so, Tranio.
Faith, he is gone unto thetaming school.
The taming school?
Is there such a place?
Ay, mistress, andPetruchio is the master
that teacheth tricks 11and 20 long
to tame a shrew and charmher chattering tongue.
Master, master, I havewatch'd so long
that I am dog-weary, ain'I?
But at last I spied
an ancient angel coming downthe hill will serve a turn.
What is he, Biondello?
Master, a mercatante or apedant, I know not what,
but formal in apparel, ingait, and countenance
surely like a father.
What of him, Tranio?
If he be credulous andtrust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seemVincentio
and give assurance toBaptista Minola
as if he were the rightVincentio.
Take in your love, andthen let me alone.
Look, Tranio.
God save you, sir.
Ah, and you, sir.
You are welcome.
Travel you far on?
Or are you at thefarthest?
Sir, at the farthest for aweek or two,
but then up farther, andas far as Rome,
and so to Tripoli if Godlend me life.
What countryman, I pray?
Ah, of Mantua.
Mantua, sir?
Marry, God forbid.
And come to Padua carelessof your life?
My life, sir?
How, I pray? For that goeshard.
Ha, ha, ha.
'Tis death for anyone inMantua to come to Padua.
Oh.
Know you not the cause?
Oh, ah, ah--
Your ships are stay'd atVenice, and the duke,
for private quarrel 'twixtyour duke and him,
hath publish'd andproclaim'd it openly.
'Tis, marvel, but that youare but newly come,
you might have heard itelse proclaim'd about.
Alas, sir, it is worse forme than so,
for I have bills for moneyby exchange
from Florence and musthere deliver them.
Well, sir, to do youcourtesy,
this will I do, and this Iwill advise you--
First, tell me, have youever been at Pisa?
Ay, sir, in Pisa have Ioften been,
Pisa renowned for gravecitizens.
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
Among them know you oneVincentio?
I know him not, but I haveheard of him,
a merchant of incomparablewealth.
He is my father, sir, andsooth to say
in countenance somewhatdoth resemble you.
As much as an apple dothan oyster and all one.
To save your life in thisextremity,
This favor will I do youfor his sake,
and think it not the worstof all your fortunes
that you are like to SirVincentio.
His name and credit shallyou undertake,
and in my house, you shallbe friendly lodged.
Look that you take uponyou as you should.
You understand me, sir?
Ah, ah, well--
So shall you stay
till you have done yourbusiness in the city.
If this be courtesy, sir,accept of it.
O sir, I do and willrepute you ever
the patron of my life andliberty.
Then go with me to makethe matter good.
This, by the way, I letyou understand:
my father is here look'dfor every day
to pass assurance of adower in marriage
'twixt me and oneBaptista's daughter here.
In all these circumstances,I'll instruct you.
Go with me to clothe youas becomes you.
Yeah, yeah, well-- ha, ha,ha, ha.
Come away.
Oh.
No, no, I dare not for mylife.
The more my wrong, themore his spite appears.
What, did he marry me tofamish me?
Beggars that come unto myfather's door
upon entreaty have apresent alms.
If not, elsewhere, theymeet with charity,
but I, who never knew howto entreat
nor never needed that Ishould entreat,
am starved for meat, giddyfor lack of sleep,
with oaths kept waking,and with brawling fed,
and that which spites memore than all these wrongs,
he does it under name ofperfect love
as who should say if Ishould sleep or eat
'twere deadly sickness orelse present death.
Oh.
I prithee, go, and get mesome repast.
I care not what so it bewholesome food.
What say you to a neat'sfoot?
'Tis passing good.
I prithee, let me have it.
I fear it is too cholerica meat.
How say you to a fat tripefinely broil'd?
I like it well.
Good Grumio, fetch it me.
I cannot tell.
I fear it is choleric.
What say you to a piece ofbeef and mustard?
A dish that I do love tofeed upon.
Ay, but the mustard is toohot a little.
Why then, the beef, andlet the mustard rest.
Ah, now, that you shallnot.
You shall have themustard, or you get nobeef of Grumio.
Then both, or one, oranything thou wilt.
Why then, the mustardwithout the beef.
Go, get thee gone, thoufalse, deluding slave,
that feed'st me with thevery name of meat!
Sorrow on thee and all thepack of you
that triumph thus upon mymisery!
Go, get thee gone, I say!
How fares my Kate?
What, sweeting, all amort?
Mistress, what cheer?
Faith, as cold as can be.
Pluck up thy spirits.
Look cheerfully upon me.
Here, love, thou see'sthow diligent I am
to dress thy meat myselfand bring it thee?
I am sure, sweet Kate, thiskindness merits thanks.
What, not a word?
Nay, then thou lovest itnot,
and all my pains is sortedto no proof.
Here, take away this dish.
I pray you, let it stand.
The poorest service isrepaid with thanks,
and so shall mine, beforeyou touch the meat.
I thank you, sir.
Signior Petruchio, fie.
You are to blame.
Come, mistress Kate, I'llbear you company.
Eat it up all, Hortensio,if thou lovest me.
Much good do it unto thygentle heart.
Kate, eat apace, and now,my honey love,
will we return unto thyfather's house
and revel it as bravely asthe best
with silken coats and capsand golden rings
and ruffs and cuffs andfardingales and things
and scarfs and fans anddouble change of bravery
and amber bracelets, beads,and all this knavery.
What?
Hast thou dined?
The tailor stays thyleisure
to deck thy body with hisruffling treasure.
Come, tailor, let us seethese ornaments.
Lay forth the gown.
Ah, what news with you,sir?
Here is the cap yourworship did bespeak.
Why, this was molded on aporringer,
a velvet dish.
Tsk, tsk.
'Tis lewd and filthy.
Why, 'tis a walnut or acockleshell,
a knack, a toy, a trick, ababy's cap.
Away with it.
Come, let me have abigger.
I'll have no bigger.
This doth fit the time,
and gentlewomen wear suchcaps as these.
When you are gentle, youshall have one too
and not till then, hmm?
That will not be in haste.
Why, sir, I trust I mayhave leave to speak,
and speak I will!
I am no child, no babe!
Your betters have enduredme say my mind,
and if you cannot, bestyou stop your ears.
My tongue will tell theanger of my heart,
or else my heartconcealing it will break,
and rather than it shall,
I will be free even to theuttermost
as I please in words!
Why, thou say'st true!
It is a paltry cap,
a custard coffin, abauble, a silken pie.
I love thee well in thatthou likest it not.
Love me or love me not, Ilike the cap,
and it I will have, or Iwill have none!
Thy gown?
Why, ay.
Come, tailor, let ussee't.
Oh.
O mercy, God.
What masquing stuff ishere?
What's this?
A sleeve?
'Tis like a demi-cannon.
What, up and down, carvedlike an apple tart?
Here's snip and nip andcut and stitch and slash
like to a censer in abarber's shop.
Why, what, i' devil's name,tailor, call'st thou this?
I see she's like to haveneither cap nor gown.
You bid me make it orderlyand well
according to the fashionand the time.
Marry, and did, but if yoube remember'd,
I did not bid you mar itto the time.
Go, hop me over everykennel home,
for you shall hop withoutmy custom, sir.
I'll none of it.
Hence, make your best ofit.
I never saw abetter-fashion'd gown,
more quaint, more pleasing,nor more commendable.
Belike you mean to make apuppet of me.
Why, true, he means tomake a puppet of thee.
She says your worship meansto make a puppet of her.
Monstrous arrogance.
Thou liest, thou thread,thou thimble,
thou yard, three-quarters,half-yard, quarter, nail,
flea, thou nit, thouwinter cricket, thou.
Braved in my own housewith a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thouquantity, thou remnant,
or I shall so be-mete theewith thy yard
as thou shalt think onprating whilst thou livest.
I tell thee, I, that thouhast marr'd her gown.
Your worship is deceived.
The gown is made just asmy master made direction.
Grumio gave order how itshould be done.
I gave him no order. Igave him the stuff.
But how did you desire itshould be made?
Marry, sir, with needleand thread.
But did you not request tohave it cut?
Thou hast faced manythings. Face not me.
Thou hast braved many men.Brave not me.
I will neither be facednor braved.
I say unto thee, I bid thymaster cut out the gown,
but I did not bid him cutit to pieces.
Ergo, thou liest.
Why, here is the note ofthe fashion to testify.
Read it.
The note lies in's throat,if he say I said so.
"Imprimis, a loose-bodiedgown"--
Master, if ever I saidloose-bodied gown,
sew me in the skirts ofit,
and beat me to death witha bottom of brown bread.
I said a gown.
Proceed.
- "with a small-compassedcape"-- - I confess the cape.
- "with a trunk sleeve"--- I confess two sleeves.
"the sleeves curiouslycut."
Ay, there's the villainy.
Error i' the bill, sir.
I commanded the sleevesshould be cut out and sewnup again,
and that, I'll prove uponthee
though thy little fingerbe armed in a thimble.
This is true that I say,
an I had thee in place wherethou shouldst know it.
Take thou the bill, giveme thy mete-yard, andspare not me.
God-a-mercy, Grumio, thenshall he have no odds.
Well, sir, in brief, thegown is not for me.
You are i' the right, sir.
It is for my mistress.
Go, take it up unto thymaster's use.
Villain, not for thy life.
Take up my mistress' gownfor thy master's use.
Why, sir, what's yourconceit in that?
O, sir, the conceit isdeeper than you think for.
Take up my mistress' gownto his master's use.
Ha, ha, ha.
Hortensio...
say thou wilt see thetailor paid.
Go take it hence, begone,and say no more!
Tailor, I'll pay thee forthy gown tomorrow.
Take no unkindness of hishasty words.
Ah, ah, ah--
Away, I say.
Um, uh--
Commend me to thy master.
Well, come, my Kate.
We will unto your father's
even in these honest, meanhabiliments.
Our purses shall be proud,our garments poor...
for 'tis the mind thatmakes the body rich.
As the sun breaks throughthe darkest clouds,
so honour peereth in themeanest habit.
What, is the jay moreprecious than the lark
because his fathers aremore beautiful?
Or is the adder betterthan the eel
because his painted skincontents the eye?
O, no, good Kate, neitherart thou the worse
for this poor furnitureand mean array.
If thou account'st itshame, lay it on me,
and therefore, frolic.
We will hence forthwith
to feast and sport us atthy father's house.
Go, call my men, and letus straight to him,
and bring our horses untoLong-lane end.
There will we mount, andthither walk on foot.
Let's see; I think 'tisnow some seven o'clock,
and well we may come thereby dinnertime.
I dare assure you, sir,'tis almost two.
It 'twill be supper timeere you come there.
It shall be seven ere I goto horse.
Look, what I speak or door think to do,
you are still crossing it.
Sirs, let't alone.
I will not go today, andere I do,
it shall be what o'clock Isay it is.
Sir, this is the house.
Please it you that I call?
Ay, sir, what else?
And but I be deceived,
Signior Baptista mayremember me, near 20 yearsago in Genoa
where we were lodger satthe Pegasus.
'Tis well, and hold yourown in any case
with such austerity as'longeth to a father.
I warrant you.
But, sir, here comes yourboy.
'Twere good he wereschool'd.
Fear you not him.
Sirrah Biondello,
now do your dutythroughly, I advise you.
Imagine 'twere the rightVincentio.
Tut, fear not me.
But hast thou done thyerrand to Baptista?
I told him that yourfather was at Venice
and that you look'd forhim this day in Padua.
Thou'rt a tall fellow.
Hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista.
Set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you arehappily met.
Sir, this is the gentlemanI told you of.
I pray you, stand goodfather to me now.
Give me Bianca for mypatrimony.
Soft son.
Sir, by your leave,
uh, ah, having come to Paduato gather in some debts,
my son Lucentio made meacquainted
with a weighty cause oflove between your daughterand himself,
and for the good report Ihear of you
and for the love hebeareth to your daughter--
and she to him--
to stay him not too long,
I am content in a goodfather's care,
to have him match'd,
and if you please to likeno worse than I,
upon some agreement, me shallyou find ready and willing
with one consent to haveher so bestow'd,
for curious I cannot bewith you,
Signior Baptista, of whomI hear so well.
Sir, pardon me in what Ihave to say.
Your plainness and yourshortness please me well.
Right true it is,
your son Lucentio heredoth love my daughter
and she loveth him,
or both dissemble deeplytheir affections--
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
And therefore, if you sayno more than this,
that like a father youwill deal with him
and pass my daughter asufficient dower,
the match is made, and allis done.
Your son shall have mydaughter with consent.
Ah, well--
I thank you, sir.
Where then do you knowbest
we be affied and suchassurance ta'en
as shall with eitherpart's agreement stand?
Not in my house, Lucentio,for, you know,
pitchers have ears, and Ihave many servants.
Besides, old Gremio ishearkening still,
and happily, we might beinterrupted.
Then at my lodging,
an it like you, there dothmy father lie,
and there, this night,
we'll pass the businessprivately and well.
Send for your daughter byyour servant here.
My boy shall fetch thescrivener presently.
Ay.
The worst is this, that atso slender warning,
you are like to have athin and slender pittance.
It likes me well.
Cambio, get you home,
and bid Bianca make herready straight,
and if you will, tell whathath happened.
Lucentio's father isarrived in Padua
and how she's like to beLucentio's wife.
I pray the gods she maywith all my heart.
Dally not with the gods,but get thee gone.
Signior Baptista, shall Ilead the way?
Welcome.
One mess is like to beyour cheer.
Come, sir, we will betterit in Pisa.
I'll follow you.
Cambio.
What sayest thou,Biondello?
You saw my master wink andlaugh upon you?
Biondello, what of that?
Faith, nothing but hasleft me here behind
to expound the meaning ormoral of his signs and tokens.
I pray thee, moralizethem.
Then thus.
Baptista is safe,
talking with the deceivingfather of a deceitful son.
And what of him?
His daughter is to be broughtby you to the supper.
And then?
The old priest of SaintLuke's church
is at your command at allhours.
And what of all this?
I cannot tell,
expect they are busied abouta counterfeit assurance.
Take you assurance ofher--
"Cum privilegio adimprimendum solum"--in't, eh?
To the church, take thepriest, clerk, and somesufficient honest witnesses.
Now, if this be not thatyou look for, I have nomore to say,
but bid Bianca farewellforever and a day.
Hearest thou, Biondello?
I cannot tarry.
I knew a wench married inan afternoon
as she went to the garden forparsley to stuff a rabbit,
and so may you, sir, andso, adieu, sir.
My master hath appointedme to go to Saint Luke's,
to bid the priest be readyto come against
you come with yourappendix.
I may, and will if she beso contented.
She will be pleased.
Then wherefore should Idoubt?
Hap what hap may, I'llroundly go about her.
It shall go hard if Cambiogo without her.
Come on, i' God's name, oncemore toward our father's.
Good Lord, how bright andgoodly shines the moon.
"The moon"--the sun: it isnot moonlight now.
I say it is the moon thatshines so bright.
I know it is the sun thatshines so bright.
By my mother's son, andthat's myself,
it shall be moon or staror what I list,
or ere I journey to yourfather's house.
Go on, and fetch ourhorses back again.
Evermore cross'd and cross'd,nothing but cross'd.
Say as he says, or weshall never go.
Forward, I pray, since wehave come so far,
and be it moon or sun orwhat you please,
an if you please to callit a rush-candle,
henceforth I vow it shallbe so for me.
I say it is the moon.
I know it is the moon.
Nay, then you lie.
It is the blessed sun.
Then, God be bless'd, itis the blessed sun,
but sun it is not if yousay it is not,
and the moon changes evenas your mind.
What you will have itnamed, even that it is,
and so it shall be so forKatharine.
Petruchio, go thy ways.
The field is won.
Well, forward, forward.
Thus the bowl should run
and not unluckily againstthe bias.
But, soft.
Company is coming here.
Good morrow, gentlemistress.
Where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, andtell me truly too,
hast thou beheld a freshergentlewoman
such war of white and redwithin her cheeks?
What stars do spangleheaven with such beauty
as those two eyes becomethat heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, oncemore good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace herfor her beauty's sake.
A' will make the man madto make a woman of him.
Young, budding virgin,fair and fresh and sweet,
whither away, or where isthy abode?
Happy the parents of sofair a child,
happier the man whomfavorable stars
allots thee for his lovelybedfellow.
Why, how now, Kate.
I hope thou art not mad.
This is a man...
old, wrinkled, faded,wither'd,
and not a maiden as thousay'st he is.
Pardon, old father, mymistaking eyes
that have been sobedazzled with the sun
that everything I look onseemeth green.
Now I perceive thou art areverend father.
Pardon, I pray thee, formy mad mistaking.
Do, good old grandsire,
and withal make knownwhich way thou travellest.
If along with us, we shallbe joyful of thy company.
Fair sir, and you my merrymistress,
that with your strangeencounter much amazed me,
my name is call'd Vincentio,my dwelling Pisa,
and bound I am to Padua,
there to visit a son of minewhich long I have not seen.
What is his name?
Lucentio, gentle sir.
Happily met, the happierfor thy son.
And now by law as well asreverend age,
I may entitle thee myloving father.
The sister to my wife,this gentlewoman,
thy son by this hathmarried.
Wonder not nor be notgrieved.
She is of good esteem,
her dowry wealthy, and ofworthy birth.
Beside, so qualified asmay beseem
the spouse of any noblegentleman.
Let me embrace with oldVincentio,
and wander we to see thyhonest son
who will of thy arrival befull joyous.
But is this true?
Or is it else yourpleasure, like pleasanttravellers,
to break a jest upon thecompany you overtake?
I do assure thee, father,so it is.
Come, go along, and seethe truth hereof,
for our first merrimenthath made thee jealous.
Well, Petruchio, this hasput me in heart.
Have to my widow, and ifshe be froward,
now hast thou taughtHortensio to be untoward.
I marvel Cambio comes notall this while.
Sir, here's the door.
This is Lucentio's house.
My father's lies moretoward the marketplace.
Thither must I, and here Ileave you, sir.
You shall not choose butdrink before you go.
I think I shall commandyour welcome here,
and by all likelihood,some cheer is toward.
They're busy within.
You were best knocklouder.
What's he that knocks as hewould beat down the gate?
Is Signior Lucentiowithin, sir?
He's within, sir, but notto be spoken withal.
What if a man bring him ahundred pound or two
to make merry withal?
You can keep your hundredpounds to yourself.
He shall need none so longas I live.
Nay, I told you your sonwas well-beloved in Padua.
Do you hear, sir?
To leave frivolouscircumstances, I pray you,
tell Signior Lucentio thathis father
is come from Pisa and is hereat the door to speak with him.
Thou liest.
His father is come fromPadua
and here looking out atthe window.
Art thou his father?
Ay, sir, so his mothersays if I may believe her.
Why, how now, gentleman.
Why, this is flat knaveryto take upon you anotherman's name.
Lay hands on the villain.
I believe a' means to cozensomebody in this city
under my countenance.